[FS-1142] Extended numeric literals (#770)
fsharp/FSharpLangDesign: RFCs/FS-1142-Extended-numeric-literal.md

This RFC covers the detailed proposal for this suggestion.

- [x] Suggestion: [Underscores in numeric literals after prefix and before suffix](https://github.com/fsharp/fslang-suggestions/issues/718), [Extend custom numeric types to support floating point literals](https://github.com/fsharp/fslang-suggestions/issues/445) and [Hexadecimal, octal and binary custom numeric literals](https://github.com/fsharp/fslang-suggestions/issues/754)
- [x] Approved in principle
- [ ] [Implementation](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/pull/17242)
- [ ] Design Review Meeting(s) with @dsyme and others invitees
- [Discussion](https://github.com/fsharp/fslang-design/discussions/769)

# Summary

This RFC will allow the following things:

- Underscores in numeric literals after prefix and before suffix like `0x_1` or `1_l` or mixed them up like `0x_1_l`.

> - Hexadecimal, octal, binary and floating point custom numeric literals like `0x1I` or `1.0G`

Reviewer: Yes. there can be some underscores before `I` or `G`

# Motivation

Make the language more consistent and easier to read. Enhance the custom numeric literals feature by supporting not only integers but also floats.

# Detailed design

1. Underscores can now be placed after prefix (`0x`, `0o`, `0b`) and before suffix (eg. `UL`, `y`, `m`, `f`). These are forbidden [previously](https://github.com/fsharp/fslang-design/blob/main/FSharp-4.1/FS-1005-underscores-in-numeric-literals.md#detailed-design).

    ```fsharp
    let pi1 = 3_.1415F      // Invalid cannot put underscores adjacent to a decimal point
    let pi2 = 3._1415F      // Invalid cannot put underscores adjacent to a decimal point

>     let socialSecurityNumber1 = 999_99_9999_L         // OK (Invalid *previously*)

Reviewer 2: I'd suggest (it is already clear that we are showing examples that are specific to this RFC anyway)
```suggestion
    let socialSecurityNumber1 = 999_99_9999_L         // OK
```

    let x1 = _52              // This is an identifier, not a numeric literal
    let x2 = 5_2              // OK (decimal literal)
    let x3 = 52_              // Invalid cannot put underscores at the end of a literal
    let x4 = 5_______2        // OK (decimal literal)

    let x5 = 0_x52            // Invalid cannot put underscores in the 0x radix prefix

>     let x6 = 0x_52            // OK (Invalid *previously*)
>     let x7 = 0x5_2            // OK (hexadecimal literal)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    let x6 = 0x_52            // OK
    let x7 = 0x5_2            // OK
```

    let x8 = 0x52_            // Invalid cannot put underscores at the end of a number

>     // In contrast to Java, literals with leading zeros are decimal in F#.

Reviewer 2: There's no need to compare with Java. That language is so far from F#. Sometimes we compare with C#, as that's a very close neighbor in .NET.

```suggestion
    // Leading zeroes may have underscores
```

Reviewer: These examples are copies of previous RFC of underscore in numeric literals

>     let x9 = 0_52             // OK (decimal literal)
>     let x10 = 05_2            // OK (decimal literal)
>     let x11 = 052_            // Invalid cannot put underscores at the end of a number

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    let x9 = 0_52             // OK (integer literal)
    let x10 = 0000_005_2      // OK (integer literal)
    let x11 = 052_            // Invalid cannot put underscores at the end of a numeric literal
```

>     // To create an octal literal, prefix it with '0o' similar to hexadezimal literals. The same rules apply:

Reviewer 2: Keep in mind that RFC's are not tutorials ;). We can assume that anybody reading these has a deep knowledge of the subject :)
```suggestion
    // Octal literals
```

    let x12 = 0_o52            // Invalid cannot put underscores in the 0o radix prefix

>     let x13 = 0o_52            // OK (Invalid *previously*)
>     let x14 = 0o5_2            // OK (octal literal)
>     let x15 = 0o52_            // Invalid cannot put underscores at the end of a number

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    let x13 = 0o_52            // OK (octal literal)
    let x14 = 0o5_2            // OK (octal literal)
    let x15 = 0o52_            // Invalid cannot put underscores at the end of a numeric literal
```

    ```

> 2. Allow number prefix (`0x`, `0o`, `0b`) before integer custom numeric literals.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Allow number prefix (`0x`, `0o`, `0b`) before integer custom numeric integer literals. This follows the same syntactic rules as current integer literals.
```

  
    ```fsharp
    let x1 = 0x123I        // big int (291)
    let x2 = 0o123I        // big int (83)
    let x3 = 0b1010I       // big int (10)
    ```

>     The number prefix **will not be removed** from the string sended to the `FromString` of the numeric literal module. This may be a break change.

Reviewer 2: No, this is not a breaking change, because it was previously not possible to do this.
```suggestion
    The number prefix is retained when passed as argument to `FromString` of the numeric literal module. 
```

Reviewer: Although the bignum (`123I`) already known how to deal with the number prefix (`0x123I` is now ok without changing the library), other custom numeric literals may not know that. This might break their function, so I think it is a breaking change.

Reviewer: That is, this is not a break change for existing source code, but it is for library.

    ```fsharp
    module NumericLiteralG =
      let FromString s = s

>     let x4 = 0x_99_9999_9999_9999_9999G    // x4 will be "0x999999999999999999"

Reviewer 2: This example with the leading underscore should go into the section of the underscores. It is part of that particular syntactic rule. 

I suggest to stick only to the rules described in this section. If they are allowed to be combined, that should go in its own section.
```suggestion
    let x4 = 0x999999999999999999G    // FromString will receive the string "0x999999999999999999"
```

    ```

3. Allow floating point custom numeric literals. 

    This will require the numeric literal module contains two new functions:

    ```fsharp
    val FromFloat: float -> 'CustomNumber
    val FromFloatString: string -> 'CustomNumber
    ```

    According to [this comment](https://github.com/fsharp/fslang-suggestions/issues/445#issuecomment-596902041),

    - When the literal has <= 15 significant figures[^1] and its exponent is within -300 to 300, the compiler will call `FromFloat` with the parsed `float` number
    - Or the compiler will call `FromFloatString` with the original string

    [^1]: The first none zero figure to last none zero figure, without the dot. Can be match by the Regex:

        ```regex
        ^-?0*(?<number>\d+\.?\d*?)0*(?:$|[eE][+-]?(?<exp>\d+))
        ```

    ```fsharp
    module NumericLiteralG =
      let FromFloat (s: float) = s
      let FromFloatString (s: string) = s

    let x1 = 123.456e-10G    // x1: float = 1.23456e-08
    let x2 = 123.456789123456789123e-10G    // x2: string = "123.456789123456789123e-10"

>     ```

Reviewer 2: Please put this in a separate RFC, it is rather separate from the other things here (it shares the same subject, but smaller RFCs with less scope have a larger change of "making it", same is true for implementation PRs).

# Drawbacks

- Custom numeric literals module might harder to write.

> - May introduce break change.

Reviewer 2: Can you explain the breaking change?

Despite my comment above, I think you are right: if we pass the strings with the prefix, this may lead to existing modules not understanding this syntax. This can be explained in the section below (i.e.: if existing modules encounter the new syntax, they may fail).

However, existing code will never fail, so in that sense, it is not a breaking change.

# Alternatives

> - For number prefix (`0x`, `0o`, `0b`) before integer custom numeric literals, we might introduce a new `FromIntegerString` to avoid the break change.

Reviewer 2: Yes, that's possible, but I think it is a bad idea, precisely because currently, only integers are allowed anyway.

> - Or firstly parse it to `bigint` then `ToString` to obtain a literal without prefix.

Reviewer 2: This is a much better suggestion. In fact, you don't even have to do that. Conversion is rather trivial and can be done on-the-fly. 

This would certainly be my preference and would avoid any burden on people writing custom numerals modules.

# Compatibility

Please address all necessary compatibility questions:

* Is this a breaking change?

> Maybe

Reviewer 2: Let's try to avoid this, if possible, see my comments and trains of thought above.

* What happens when previous versions of the F# compiler encounter this design addition as source code?
Can write numeric literal module with new functions in the source code, but cannot use these new numeric literal grammar.

* What happens when previous versions of the F# compiler encounter this design addition in compiled binaries?

> Cannot use the new numeric literal grammar.

Reviewer 2: Let's revisit this after we have a decision.

# Pragmatics

## Tooling

Please list the reasonable expectations for tooling for this feature, including any of these:

* Colorization

>   Might need to change the color schema of the numeric literals.

Reviewer 2: this is probably not going to be a problem, as the syntax highlighter uses the parser results. If the parser says something is a numeric literal, it will be colored as such.

But certainly something to test before merging this change

# Unresolved questions

> - Should we introduce a new `FromIntegerString` or use any way to remove number prefix from custom integer literal string passed to `FromString`?

Reviewer 2: My suggestion is: no
